# Linked Data for the Humanities: methods and techniques


## Background and motivation
The primary goal of the digital humanities vision is the possibility to develop scholar studies at a large scale, where the sources of investigation can be reused among studies and arguments and methods to be developed and compared in a rigorous way. However, the underlying assumption is that sufficient data are available and that these data are properly described and distributed to the research community (Schöch, 2013).
The Linked Open Data (LOD) movement started within the Semantic Web (SW) research community with the objective of building a Web of Data (Heath, 2011; Bizer, 2011). So far, the impact of Linked Data in the Library and Cultural Heritage domain has been significant and testified by large scale efforts such as the one of Europeana (Haslhofer, 2011). Related to that, LD has proven to be the framework for Open Science, linking knowledge with FAIR principles (Wilkinson, 2016) electing the Web URI as the natural method to cite everything. Indeed, Linked Data (LD) seems to match the Digital Humanities (DH) agenda perfectly. However, at a closer look, the impact of Semantic Web research on the Humanities has been discontinuous.
On one hand, digital humanities projects emerged having data as focal point of the research and as enabler of novel approaches to humanistic enquiry. Notable examples are the LED Project (Adamou, 2014), drawing on LOD published by The Open University (Daga, 2016), and Pelagios (Isaksen, 2014), aiming at building a hub of geospatial data about the ancient world. However, the potential for data reuse seems to remain largely unexploited. In many DH projects, data is linked through user interfaces as hypertexts with minimal support for RDF and SPARQL. Too often, the data side of LD is left out as future work.
On the other hand, Semantic Web researchers contribute tools to support scholars in dealing with LD (e.g. Adamou, 2014; Hyvönen, 2012; Hoekstra, 2016; Lodi, 2017). The variety of use cases and endeavours is well testified in the proceedings of the WHiSe workshop (Adamou, 2016), reaching the third edition this year.  These span from cultural heritage (Bojars, 2016), historical datasets (Hoekstra, 2016), biographical data (Leskinen, 2017), the ancient world, music (Daquino, 2017) and musicology (Nurmikko-Fuller, 2016), on reflecting about methodological aspects (De Roure, 2016). Indeed, Humanities can be a land of opportunities for SW researchers, a space where the Semantic Web vision can be tested by challenging requirements coming from sophisticated, highly specialised domains of enquiry.
However, the interaction between the two communities has been occasional and as a result foundational techniques and methods developed by the SW community are still perceived as esoteric by many DH practitioners. In addition, more recent approaches have not been disseminated yet in the DH community and could contribute at enriching the toolkit available for leveraging Linked Data, from supporting the knowledge extraction phase (e.g. combining language processing with ontology engineering and deep learning) (Alam, 2017), to effectively build applications on top of SPARQL endpoints (Daga, 2015).
Adding semantics to DH has multiple effects: as an enabling technology (as exemplified above), as a vehicle to grow DH data as sharable and interoperable assets, and as an experimental platform to make innovative research in computer science by reverse engineering humanistic methods. 
A plethora of use cases are emerging that can benefit of practical semantic platforms such as LOD and Knowledge Graphs (KG). A cartography of such cases can be built within the following areas (in an increasing degree of hybridisation between humanistic and computational techniques):

 1) use or adaptation of computational tools for the collection, display or use of databases, corpora, collections; 
 2) creation of new exploration and discovery methods in humanities (both within works and collections, and in virtual reconstructions of places or artefacts); 
 3)	implementation of software components supporting humanities;
 4)	creation of new knowledge (e.g., extraction of patterns from large corpora as in distant reading, availability of aggregated data for particular communities);
 5)	creation of new hybrid methods (e.g. cognitive computing, ontological engineering, defeasible logic, embodied or grounded semantics);
 6)	creative use of hybridisation to generate new works or collections (literary chatbots, painting morphisms).

